
_**Predicted Gene Methylation**_
Whole transcriptome patterns of predicted germline DNA methylation were similar for all coral species (Figure 1). Log likelihood statistics for all species indicated that a 2-component Gaussian mixture model provided a better fit to the distribution than a unimodal fit. All CpG O/E distributions were characterized by a relatively small low-CpG O/E component and a larger high-CpG O/E component. 

Mean CpG O/E for each GOslim biological process category also exhibited similar patterns among coral species (Figure 2). For all six species, the top four biological processes with the highest mean CpG O/E were cell-cell signalling, cell adhesion, signal transduction, and developmental processes. In contrast, DNA metabolism, protein metabolism, transport, and other biological processes were consistently among the lowest categories in terms of CpG O/E. 

In *Acropora hyacinthus*, *A. millepora*, and *A. palmata*, genes expressed differentially in response to environmental stress showed different CpG O/E distributions than those of the whole transcriptomes (Figure 3). In all cases, mean CpG O/E of differentially expressed genes was higher than that of the whole transcriptome. This was especially true for genes differentially expressed in response to thermal stress in *A. hyacinthus* and *A. palmata* (both p < 0.001). Differences between CpG O/E distributions of OA response genes and the whole transcriptome of *A. millepora* were more subtle (p = 0.03).
